# Cognitive Science Finals
 The dissonance magnitude does not affect the way humans adapt to relational cognitive dissonances:
 My year long research searching for a phenomenon in humans that was previously found in ANNs.
 
Does the magnitude of cognitive dissonance affect the way people adapt to it? I was fortunate enough to try and answer this question.
I will start with a small introduction about myself. My name is Ron and I'm a 3rd year student majoring in Computer Science and Cognitive Sciences in the Hebrew University (open to work btw). 
This research was a part of an individual research course, which in turn will become a fully conducted seminar paper. This experience has taught me a lot about the lifecycle of research, and how non-trivial finding new, true, information about the brain is. I wish to thank my mentor Tomer Barak, which was a great mentor and company in my first dive in the world of brain research. 
In an era where AI is used interchangeably with ML, my laboratory and I tried to find a phenomena in humans which was previously shown in an artificial neural network, or in short, ANN. (enter reference). 
Before we dive into the research, lets discuss about the phenomena called cognitive dissonance. Wikipedia suggests the following definition: “cognitive dissonance is described as the mental disturbance people feel when their beliefs and actions are inconsistent and contradictory, ultimately encouraging some change (often either in their beliefs or actions) to align better and reduce this dissonance.” When I first heard the definition, a few associations came to mind. The first is the feeling whenever you’re not sure if you are dreaming or not, and the second is the feeling when you’re not sure whether to believe a story someone tells you.
The two associations are quite common yet very different in nature. The most significant difference is the Prior, i.e. the prior knowledge one has about the world. In the dreaming example, as most of the time we are in a waking state, the prior is that we are most likely awake. On the other hand, believing whether someone tells you the truth or not depends on many different factors, like how many times the person in front of you lied, and how gullible and naïve you are. Moreover, the content that the person tells you about will also affect your final evaluation. Is he talking about this crazy story about how he stopped a bank robbery with his bare hands, and everyone clapped? or about what he had for breakfast? Was I walking to the aquarium in my dream? Or was I in a gunfight with a gang of local street cats who tried to rob a bank? All these factors come together in a truly unheard-of speed and complexity to give the final evaluation: yes, or no? 
Now that we know what a cognitive dissonance is, lets talk about the research. 
As I previously mentioned, our research was built upon a research about ANNs, or more specifically, a relation network. A relation network (RN) is an artificial neural network  that can reason about relations among objects. An example category of such relations is spatial relations (above, below, left, right).

The research has shown that when teaching a RN a certain rule and then inverting the rule, there were two pathways to solve the new problem. The first, is changing the representation of the images (while keeping the relation). The second, is changing the relation between the images (while keeping the representation). The  sole variable effecting the adaptation pathway, was the dissonance magnitude, i.e, what was the magnitude of the rule the network has learned, which caused different levels of dissonance when learning the invert rule. 
With this in mind, we tried to impose this phenomenon upon human cognition. Very similar to the RN, we tried to teach the participants a certain prior- “Blue is correct” using a color-ratio identification task, and a rule- “More blue is correct”, using a color-ratio task, then inverting the rule and see how it affected the prior. 
The results were quite surprising. Optimistic in nature, we expected to find the same sigmoid of inversions found in the research on ANNs. To our surprise, the results has shown a beautiful uniform distribution on around 20%. Meaning, around 20% of the people, independent of the dissonance magnitude, had switched their representation. Baffled, yet assertive, we looked back upon the research to see what could have gone wrong. The final part, we remembered, contains a message in the nature of “This is the final and most important task, you only have one chance to get it right. If you do, you will get a bonus payment”.
Although there was no correct answer, we wanted to give the participants motivation to finish the experiment. Changing the final massage into something more relaxing, had a tremendous (and significant) effect on the results. Now, around 40% of the people had switched their representation, again, independent of the dissonance magnitude.
At this point, we came out with nothing but a pseudo-interesting pseudo-obvious result about the nature of risk aversion when money is in play. One last try before we gave up, we took a closer look on the data we have gathered so far. 
Effect! Tomer has shouted, “There is an effect!”. Rushing to the laboratory I saw the following: The distance from the true ratio in the color-ratio identification task was significantly different between the small dissonance and the big one. “But why?” I asked. 
There is a beauty and a catch in science. When everything is right and according to the rules, significant effect is a significant effect. Translating the results into conclusions is when facts become opinions, and truths become maybes. Maybe the big dissonance caused the participants to be more certain about the correct answer? Maybe the small dissonance caused the participants to answer more quickly therefore less accurately? With this in mind, I walk into the creation of my seminar paper. 
If you made it this far, thank you for listening. If you have any questions feel free to contact me. I wish to thank again the Yonatan Loewenstein laboratory in ELSC, and my mentor Tomer Barak which accompanied me thus far, and will continue in the writing of the final paper. 
